The most complicated part of the rig is going to be the foot roll here and what we want to do with that
is be able to plant the foot on the heel roll it forward and have it roll forward up onto the toes up
onto the ball of the toe and roll back to the heel again.
So that particular functionality is going to take a bit to do.
We're going to do this over the next few videos.
And the reason why I'm going to be doing this in a course that is fairly introductory is that I really
think it's important if you're going to animate a character the ability to plant and roll the foot when
you're doing a walk cycle a run a jump.
Anything is really important really adds believability to the animation.
So even though we're going to keep the arms fairly simple with forward Kent Emacs and we'll talk more
about forward cinematics and inverse kind Mannix here in a bit.
Even though we're gonna keep the arms fairly simple we're gonna set up a fairly complex rig for the
feet.
Let's now come out of weight paint mode to object mode here.
And also we don't need our wireframe on the character anymore.
I'll come over here and let's turn off wireframe and all edges.
So we don't see that.
And then let's go back to the rig and let's go to edit mode for the rig here.
What we need to do first is to create an i k chain here on the leg and we'll begin with the left leg
first.
And what I mean by I K or inverse cinematics is the ability to move the limb by just selecting say a
foot bone and moving it around and the other joints on the limb adjust and adapt.
So it's kind of like when someone shakes your hand they can take your hand and move it back and forth
and your elbow and your shoulder adapt and move along with where the hand is as opposed to say forward
cinematics which we will do for the arm.
This is more like a wooden toy if you want the hand to be in a particular place for say a wooden toy
you would have to bend the arm at the shoulder and then at the elbow and then at the wrist to get that
hand in a certain place we'll be using both types of movement on this character so I think you'll get
a better idea of it as we go along.
So to begin our inverse can semantics change here on the left leg.
What we want to do is choose first of all the foot.
And let me go over here to this panel so we can see the names of the bones when we choose them.
We can also see them here which is going to help as well.
First of all here in edit mode let's just duplicate this bone.
I'll press shift D and then enter and now we have this new bone here in the exact same place as the
foot bone.
So let's change the name of this.
Let's call this foot.
I K Dot l.
There we go.
And because we've duplicated this bone off of that main foot bone it still has the parent child relationships
of that original bone.
So it is a child of the lower leg and a parent of the toe.
And we want to clear that away.
So to clear a parent child relationship we can press all the P and then choose clear parent and we go.
So now this bone here is a bone all on its own.
Now for the rest of this setup we're gonna need to go to Poe's mode.
So let's come back over here and go to pose mode.
There we go.
And now we can go back to that original football and I'm going to click right in here and that will
switch me over to the foot dot L that original foot bone.
Now I'm going to come over here to the bone constraints panel.
And here is where we'll add that inverse cinematics constraint.
So I'll click here and let's choose inverse kinetics.
Now for the target we're gonna want it to be the armature and then for the bone we want to control this.
We want to choose that foot.
I K I have it here but we can also just type in f o t to filter the list and choose that foot.
I K L there we have that now it looks kind of crazy like something has gone wrong here and it isn't
that it's gone wrong it's just we haven't completed the setup yet.
So what's happening here is it's using the entire rig as the IAEA chain and we only need it to extend
to the lower leg and the upper leg to bones.
So we need an IKEA chain length of 2.
And here we go chain length right here so let's just increase this to 1 and then 2 and then instead
of using the tail as the last element we'll use the tip of the bone.
So let's uncheck use tail.
All right.
So there we go.
Now we've got that I K chain set up.
So what does that mean.
Well we can come over here and click and let me just turn off that rotation gizmo there and if we click
on the bone and choose that foot I K bone right here you can see it here.
And if I come back over here you can see it here.
So now we have that foot.
I k bone selected and if we hit G can move it around you can see just like shaking your hand we can
grab that one part of the chain and the hip and the knee bone then adjust to compensate to where you
put that target bone you see.
So that is our AK chain.
But the problem is look at the foot bone as I move it the foot bone and the foot.
I k bone become separated and we don't want that.
So let me just hit the right mouse button to get out of that.
Now we need to add a constraint to make sure the foot I K in the foot bone stay together.
So what let's do is take that original foot bone again right here foot dot L and we'll add a copy rotation
constraints so it matches the rotation of the I K bone.
Let's come over here to the bone constraint panel and we'll click here to add a bone constraint copy
rotation.
There we go.
Now for this one we want.
Once again the target to be the armature.
We want the bone to be the foot.
I k again now if we come back and select that foot i k bone.
There we go.
Notice here we've got foot I k now if we hit G and move that around you can see that original foot bone
matches the rotation of the eye K bone and they stay together.
So let me come up here and choose the root bone and if we hit G we can see that foot stays planted there.
When we move the hips around like that.
All right.
So that is how we set up our inverse Cana Maddox chain.
Let's do that quickly again for the other side.
Remember we need to begin in edit mode so let's select that foot dot ah it shift D and enter.
Now let's change this to foot.
I K Dot R and then we'll clear the parent out P clear parent.
Now we go back to pose mode select that original foot bone right here and we'll add in an inverse can
Maddox constraint right there our target will be the armature bone will be the K foot okay.
Dot are chain link to uncheck use.
Tail.
Now we constrain the foot bone to the eye.
K bone by selecting that foot.
Ah we have it selected here still adding a copy rotation target armature and bone.
IK There we go.
So now if we choose that I K bone right there and hit G We get the same kind of functionality.
There we go.
So once again we can select that root bone and hit G.
And we can have him do the squats.
All right.
So now that we've setup the inverse can a man in the next video we'll begin working on setting up the
foot roll rig.